1. Introduction
Pattern recognition is a fundamental task performed
very efficiently by the brain. Artificial intelligence is
making quick progress in reproducing these performances
with artificial neural networks. In particular,
deep neural networks have been successful both for
static and sequential patterns recognition in many
applications such as image recognition, analysis of
video streams or natural language processing. However,
these types of neural networks require extensive
training on large datasets and heavy computations.
A promising alternative are spiking neural networks
(SNNs), also known as the third generation of artificial
neural networks,1 which have in theory more
computational efficiency.2 Some class of SNNs such
as spiking neural P systems have been shown to be Turing universal.3 Whereas formal neurons output
a real value modeling a firing rate, spiking
neuron models have a temporal dynamics and output
spike trains, thus keeping the spike timing information.
Importantly, they offer an opportunity to
be implemented in very-low-power analog neuromorphic
hardware that currently undergoes important
developments, in particular with memristive
devices that are able to mimic synaptic plasticity,
such as spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP),
at a highly miniaturized scale.4–11 STDP rules are
local learning rules that change the synapse weight
depending on the time difference between pre- and
post-synaptic spikes. It has been shown that incorporating
such rule in SNNs allows to perform unsupervised
learning,12,13 and this strategy has been
successfully applied for visual or auditory pattern
recognition.14–17 Yet, for now, the range of applications
of spiking neural networks in pattern recognition
remains limited, most studies being focused on
biological modeling.18–22 Whereas second-generation
networks, and some specific spiking neural network,
23–25 can be trained using backpropagation,
there is no well-established way to train a spiking
neural network implementing an STDP rule.
New architectures thus remain to be proposed to
address a wider range of applications of these
networks.
Here, we present an STDP spiking neural network
to perform spike-sorting, a central problem in
neuroscience. Spike-sorting consists in determining
from a common extracellular signal how many cells
emit action potentials and, for each cell, when these
events take place. Action potentials occur sparsely at
discrete time points, and appear in the signal as temporal
waveforms whose shapes typically differ from
one neuron to another according to the geometry and
position of the cells with respect to the recording
electrode. Thus, spike-sorting can be seen as an unsupervised
pattern recognition task, where the goal is
to detect and classify different temporal waveforms,
occurring sparsely in a noisy signal. Currently available
spike-sorting approaches typically use three separate
steps.
• The first step is the detection of action potentials,
usually done by thresholding the extracellular signal
directly or after suitable filtering, for example
using an energy operator26 or templates.27
• The second step is the extraction of features
from the action potential waveforms,
such as amplitudes,27 wavelet coefficients28 or
reduced representations obtained with dimensionality
reduction algorithms such as PCA.29–31
• Finally, the last and most computation-demanding
step consists in clustering these features. Many
clustering algorithms have been proposed, such
as expectation-maximization,29,30 k-means,32 cmeans,
33 mean-shift31,34 or superparamagnetic
clustering.28 Noticeably, Ref. 35 used an STDP
network for this clustering step.
Although some spike-sorting algorithms have been
designed to process neural data online,26,35,36 most
methods remain offline or require an offline preprocessing
step, precluding their use in online applications
such as brain–computer interfaces (BCIs).
Moreover, the current availability of very dense
arrays of microelectrodes37–42 creates the need for
efficient ways to handle the important data flow
generated by these devices and in particular to
automate spike-sorting processing.30,31,34,36,43 Ideally,
implantable neural interfaces would strongly
benefit from fully automatic spike-sorting algorithms
compatible with very-low-power hardware
implementation for future embedding at the electrode
site. However, no such algorithm is available
yet.
In this context, we propose to use a spiking neural
network as a radically new way to handle the
problem of spike-sorting. We present an STDP network
architecture designed for this specific problem.
The network processes continuously the stream of
data recorded by a microelectrode and directly outputs
trains of artificial spikes that correspond, after
a short learning period, to the sorted activity of the
recorded cells. Thus, the entire processing in done
by a single network in a fully unsupervised manner,
without explicit implementation of the conventional
three-step procedure and without requiring a readout
post-processing step. Beyond the classical STDP
learning rule, the network combines an attention
mechanism, delayed synapses and threshold adaptation
to handle simultaneously the problems of
detecting and classifying time-varying patterns with
different sizes. This approach was tested on both
simulated and real data and compared to two available
spike-sorting software, Osort26 andWave clus,28 ratio (SNR).
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Network model
We considered an artificial spiking neural network
composed of three layers (input, intermediate and
output) and one “attention” neuron, all connected
by feedforward synapses implementing specific plasticity
rules (Fig. 1). This network, composed of “sensory”
and Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neurons, is
bio-inspired rather than realistic. In particular, the
characteristic times are much shorter than realistic
ones, which allows processing the information contained
in the action potential shapes and makes the
approach compatible with real-time spike-sorting at
the millisecond time scale. After learning, the output
spikes of the network correspond to the detected
and sorted action potentials present in the input signal.
To avoid any confusion in the following, the
term “spikes” hereafter denotes action potentials
emitted by neurons of the artificial neural network,
while “action potentials” denotes those of real neurons
embedded in the input signal analyzed by the
network.
2.1.1. Input layer
The first layer, called the input layer, encodes the
incoming neural signal within a sliding time window
preceding the current time point into artificial spikes
that are passed on to the next layers. Neurons of this
input layer act as “sensory” neurons.
The input neurons are organized into a grid with
Nc columns corresponding to different processing
delays of the input signal, starting from zero and
regularly spaced by Δtc [see Fig. 2(a)]. Within each
Fig. 1. Overview of the network structure.
Fig. 2. (Color online) Input layer structure: (a) Input
layer activation at a specific time step (blue arrow). (b)
Spike train emitted by one specific input neuron, highlighted
in bold red in (a).
column, each neuron is sensitive to a given range
of signal values and fires at regular time steps Δts
when the signal falls within this sensitivity range [see
Fig. 2(b)]. Thus, at each of these time steps, each
input neuron performs a simple computation that
consists in comparing the input signal value to the
extrema of its sensitivity range and fires accordingly.
The size of this range,ΔVs, is the same for each neuron,
and is set proportional to the noise level. The
sensitivity ranges of neurons from one column are
regularly overlapping so that, for each possible signal
value, Noverlap neurons of this column fire.Within
one column, the step between two consecutive sensitivity
ranges is determined by the size of the sensitivity
range ΔVs and the overlapping factor Noverlap,
and the total number of neurons is determined by
the total signal value range to cover. The input layer
processes the input signal at regular time steps, Δts.
This time step is chosen sufficiently short so that the
time jitter due to sampling does not impact the performance
of the network. As this time step is shorter
than the original signal sampling time step, the signal
is linearly interpolated for steps falling between samples.
Assuming that the timing properties are consistent
between different neural recordings, the sensitivity
range size is the only parameter of the network
that needs to be adjusted depending on the signal
properties. The values of the input layer parameters
are given in Table 1 Parameter Description Value
ΔVs Sensitivity range size 3.5σnoise
Noverlap Number of neurons active 10
at the same time within
one column
Δts Delay interval between two 0.0125ms
activations of the input layer
Δtc Time interval between two 0.05ms
columns
Nc Number of columns 10
As a result, the input layer converts continuously
the input signal into an artificial spike train encoding
at each time step the shape of the signal within a
sliding window. The role of the rest of the network is
to detect different patterns into this input spike train
that reflect the shape of action potentials stemming
from different cells.
2.1.2. Attention neuron
The role of the “attention” neuron is to detect every
action potential occurrence embedded in the input
signal. Each time an action potential is present in
the input signal, the attention neuron fires a sequence
of spikes from the beginning to the end of the action
potential. This spiking activity in turn modulates the
intermediate and output layers, thus acting as an
attention mechanism gating the learning mechanisms
occurring in these two subsequent layers.
The attention neuron receives all spikes emitted
by the input layer through excitatory synapses that
implement a short-term plasticity (STP) rule, governed
by the following equation:
dw
dt
=
1
τstp
(1 − w) −

s
w ∗ fd ∗ δ(t − ts), (1)
where w is the synaptic weight, τstp a time constant,
fd a depression factor and ts the pre-synaptic
spike times. This STP rule weakens the weights
of synapses for which pre-synaptic spikes occur at
high frequency.44 As a result, the weights of the
synapses corresponding to pre-synaptic input neurons
encoding signal amplitudes within the range of
noise (and thus often activated) are weakened, while
synapses corresponding to pre-synaptic input neurons
encoding signal amplitudes outside this range
remain strong. The time constant τstp is set long
compared to the duration of an action potential,
so that the synaptic weights do not change significantly
during an action potential. The depression
factor fd is set so that the asymptotic weight of a
synapse stemming from an input neuron firing at
each time step is significantly lower (×0.13 in our
network implementation) than that stemming from
an input neuron never firing. Thanks to these STP
synapses, the excitation received by the attention
neuron is much more important for infrequent signal
amplitudes than for signal values close to zero
(Fig. 3, top and middle).
The attention neuron is an LIF neuron, whose
membrane potential V is governed by the following
equation:
dV
dt
= − 1
τm
∗ V (t) +

i

s
wi(ti,s)δ(t − ti,s), (2)
where V stands for the neuron potential, τm for
the membrane time constant, i indexes the incoming
synapses with synaptic weight wi, s indexes the
received spikes from each synapse i with arrival time
ti,s and δ is the Dirac delta function. The membrane
time constant of the attention neuron is chosen relatively
short, in order to detect an action potential
as early as possible. Combined with the STP
rule, this LIF dynamic leads to an increased membrane
potential when an action potential occurs in
the input signal (Fig. 3, bottom). The attention neuron
threshold value is then set empirically to obtain a
Fig. 3. Short-term plasticity effect on the attention neuron.
Top: Example of input signal. Middle: Corresponding
EPSP induced on the attention neuron by each input
neuron of one input layer column. Bottom: Time evolution
of the attention neuron potential and its firing
times given its threshold (dashed line) and self-excitation compromise between false negative and false positive
detection errors. The neuron has no refractory period
and no reset potential is applied. Instead, after firing,
the potential is increased through a self-excitatory
synapse, which constitutes a hysteresis mechanism.
The self-excitatory synapse ensures that, even if the
action potential waveform crosses zero, thus lowering
temporarily the attention neuron potential, the
detection spike train is continuous from the beginning
to the end of the action potential. The values of
the attention neuron parameters are given in Table 2.
2.1.3. Intermediate layer
The role of each intermediate layer neuron is to learn
to recognize specific fragments of action potential
waveforms present in the input signal so that the
layer emits different firing sequences for different
action potential waveforms. The activity of intermediate
layer neurons is gated by the attention neuron
through fixed-weight excitatory synapses, ensuring
that these neurons fire when the attention neuron
fires and remain silent otherwise. Thus, for each
action potential occurrence in the signal, the intermediate
layer fires a sequence of spikes characterizing
the action potential shape, as it is different for different
action potential waveforms and stable across
occurrences of the same waveform [Fig. 4(a)]. These
xdifferent sequences are then processed by the output
layer, to sort the action potentials.
Neurons of the intermediate layer are LIF neurons
following a similar equation as the attention
neuron [Eq. (2)]. They receive all spikes emitted by
Table 2. Attention neuron parameters.
Parameters Description Value
τm Membrane time constant 0.5 ∗ Δtc = 0.025ms
τrefrac Refractory period 0
Th Neurons threshold 0.43 ∗ Noverlap
∗ Nc/(1 − exp(−Δts/τm)) = 108.1
wself Weight of the self-excitatory synapse 0.3 ∗ (1/exp(−Δts/τm) − 1) ∗ Th = 10.5
τstp Short-term plasticity time constant 10 ∗ Δtc ∗ Nc = 5ms
fd Short-term plasticity depression factor 1 − exp(−6.5 ∗ Δts/τstp) = 0.0161
Fig. 4. The intermediate layer learns waveform fragments: (a) Spike sequence emitted by the intermediate layer for each
action potential occurrence. Top row: Signal shapes for all action potential occurrences in the last 100 s of simulation.
Middle row: Spike trains of the intermediate layer synchronized with 50 different action potential occurrences. Bottom row:
Distributions of intermediate spike latencies relative to each action potential occurrence (the histograms are cumulated).
The different colors stand for different intermediate neurons. (b) STDP rule applied on the synapses stemming from
the input layer. (c) Weight evolution of the synapses projecting on one specific intermediate neuron. (d) Learnt shapes
correspond to fragments of waveforms occurring in the signal. The first column shows the learnt weights for six different
intermediate neurons. The three other columns show the signal shape at each action potential occurrence, the black lines
show the part of the signal encoded by the input layer at the moment when the intermediate neuron fires. (e) Weights the input layer through excitatory synapses whose
weights vary according to an STDP rule. The membrane
time constant τm of the intermediate neurons
is of the same order of magnitude as Δts, so they are
sensitive to the shape of the signal at current time,
which they have to recognize. As part of a winnertake-
all (WTA) mechanism, each time an intermediate
neuron fires, all intermediate neurons reset their
potentials to zero. This ensures that only one neuron
fires at a time. Intermediate neurons thus fire
one after the other, separated by a time interval that
depends on the received excitation and the threshold,
and is here adjusted to be approximately equal
to Δtc.
The STDP rule is based on a coincidence time
window defined by the value τstdp+ [Fig. 4(b)]. A
pre-synaptic spike is considered to coincide with a
post-synaptic spike if it arrives at most τstdp+ before
the post-synaptic spike. For each post-synaptic spike
occurrence, the synapse weight is decreased by
Δwpost, and additionally, if a pre-synaptic spike
coincides with the post-synaptic spike, the synapse
weight is increased by Δwpair (resulting in a total
change of Δwpost+Δwpair). Consequently, the synaptic
weight globally increases toward one if the ratio of
pre- and post-synaptic spike coincidences over postsynaptic
spike occurrences is superior to the ratio
|Δwpost/Δwpair|, and decreases to zero otherwise.
The synapses weights are initialized randomly
according to a uniform distribution. The mean
weight is chosen so that the neurons potential is
just high enough to reach the threshold when the
attention neuron also fires. Thus, at the beginning
of the signal processing, when an unknown action
potential waveform is presented, one intermediate
neuron arbitrarily fires first and inhibits the others.
This neuron updates its synaptic weights whereas
synapses projecting to the other intermediate neurons
remain unchanged. The STDP time window
being equal to Δtc, the potentiated synapses reflect
the shape of the signal at this specific time with
the same time resolution as the input layer. Consequently,
when a similar waveform fragment occurs
again, this neuron is more likely to fire and thus reinforce
the specificity of its response to this particular
waveform pattern [Figs. 4(c) and 4(d)]. Once learning
has been achieved, several intermediate neurons
become specifically responsive to different waveform
fragments [Figs. 4(d) and 4(e)]. The intermediate
layer is constituted of 60 neurons, which we found
enough to learn the different possible input patterns.
This was confirmed by the fact that some intermediate
neurons did not learn any pattern [Fig. 4(e)]. It is
possible to increase this number if a great variety of
waveforms is expected in the signal. The values of the
intermediate layer parameters are given in Table 3.
Table 3. Intermediate layer parameters.
Parameter Description Value
Nneur Number of neurons 60
τm Membrane time constant 2 ∗ Δts = 0.025ms
τrefrac Refractory period Δtc = 0.05ms
Vreset Reset potential 0
Vinhib Post-inhibition potential 0
wAN Weight of the synapses coming from the attention neuron 0.6 ∗ Nc ∗ Noverlap = 60
Th Neurons threshold (wAN +0.7 ∗ Nc ∗ Noverlap)
∗ (1 − exp(−Δtc/τm))/(1 − exp(−Δts/τm))
= 252.7
winit− Minimal value for the feedforward synapses weight 0.4
initialization
winit+ Maximal value for the feedforward synapses weight 1
initialization
τstdp+ Positive STDP rule time window Δtc + 0.5 ∗ Δts = 0.0563ms
τstdp− Negative STDP rule time window 0
Δwpair Weight change for a pre-synaptic spike coinciding with a 0.005
post-synaptic spike
Δwpost Weight change for each post-synaptic spike −0.55 ∗ Δwpair
1850059-6
Int. J